Intro to IT Security Module 1 What is IT Security • A set of cyber security strategies that prevent unauthorized access • Focuses on protecting organizational assets against cyberattacks and other threats • InfoSec – processes and tools designed to protect sensitive business information • IT Sec – securing digital data through computer network security Goal of IT Security 1. Confidentiality 2. Integrity 3. Availability Domains of IT Security 1. Network Security 2. Internet Security 3. Endpoint Security 4. Cloud Security 5. Application Security 6. Information Security 7. Operational Security 8. Mobile Security 9. IoT Security 10.User Education 11.Cyber Security What is Cybersecurity? • Protection of networked systems and data from unauthorized use or harm (Cisco) • Refers to a set of techniques used to protect the integrity of an organization’s security architecture and safeguard its data against attack, damage, or unauthorized access (Palo Alto Networks) • The practice of defending computers, servers, mobile devices, electronic systems, networks, and data from malicious attacks (Kaspersky) What is Cybersecurity all about? • A successful cybersecurity approach has multiple layers of protection spread across computers, networks, programs or data that one intends to keep safe What is Cybersecurity all about? • In an organization, the people, processes and technology must all complement one another to create and effective defense from cyber attacks What is Cybersecurity all about? • A unified threat management system can automate integrations across products and accelerate key security operations functions: detection, investigation, and remediation Importance of cybersecurity • A single cybersecurity attack can result in everything from identity theft, extortion attempts, to the loss of important data • Cyberattacks may also occur in critical infrastructures like power stations, hospitals, and financial service companies Importance of cybersecurity Importance of cybersecurity • Increasingly sophisticated attacks • Widely available hacking tools • Compliance • Rising cost of breaches • Strategic, board-level concern • Cyber crime is big business Challenges of Cybersecurity • Internet of Things • Rapidly Evolving Risks • Big & Confidential Data • Organized & State-sponsored Hacker Groups • Remote Working • High-speed Internet • BYOD Impact of a Security Breach • Ruined Reputation • Vandalism • Theft • Revenue Lost • Damaged Intellectual Property Types of Attackers Cyber Attackers Insiders • Employees and ex-employees • Contract Staff • Trusted Partners Outsiders Organized Attackers • Cyber Criminals • Hacktivists • Terrorists • State-sponsored Hackers • Black hats • Grey hats • White hats Amateurs Attacks Concepts & Techniques Definition of Terms • Vulnerability • Weaknesses or flaws in the hardware or software • Exploit • (v) Method used to take advantage vulnerability • (n) Tools used to take advantage vulnerability • Breach • Successful exploit if vulnerability Types of Cybersecurity Threats • Cybercrime • Efforts by bad actors to profit from their malicious attacks • May be direct financial theft, identity theft, selling info from data break, hijacking computing resources for crypto-jacking to mine cryptocurrencies Types of Cybersecurity Threats • Disruption • Attempts to disrupt operations of organizations by attacking their IT and operational technology (OT) infrastructure to damage it, temporarily shut it down, or hold it for ransom Types of Cybersecurity Threats • Espionage • Attacks backed by state agencies that are part of a boarder espionage and military activity. Types of Malware • Spyware • Adware • Bot • Rootkit • Scareware Types of Malware • Ransomware • Virus • Trojan Horse • Worm • MiTM Symptoms of Malware • There is an increase in CPU usage • There is a decrease in computer speed • The computer freezes or crashes often • There is a decrease in Web browsing speed • There are unexplainable problems with network connections • Files are modified • Files are deleted Symptoms of Malware • There is a presence of unknown files, programs, or desktop icons • There are unknown processes running • Programs are turning off or reconfiguring themselves • Email is being sent without the user’s knowledge or consent Methods of Infiltration 1. Social Engineering • Pretexting • Tailgating • Something for something • Phishing • Smishing • Vishing Methods of Infiltration 2. Password Cracking • Brute-force • Network Sniffing • Social Engineering Methods of Infiltration 3. Vulnerability Exploitation a) Gather info about the target using a port scanner or social engineering b) Determine learned info from (a) c) Look for vulnerability d) Use a known exploit or a write a new exploit Methods of Infiltration 4. Advanced Persistent Threats • Usually well-funded • Deploy customized malware Methods to Deny Service • Overwhelm quantity of traffic • Send enormous quantity of data at a rate that cannot be handled • Maliciously formatted packets • Sent to a host or application and the receiver is unable to handle it • Zombie – Infected Host • Botnet – Network of Infected Hosts Methods to Deny Service • SEO • Search Engine Optimization • Techniques to improve a website’s ranking by search engine • SEO Poisoning • Increase traffic to malicious websites • Force malicious sites to rank higher Blended Attacks • Uses multiple techniques to compromise a target • Uses a hybrid of worms, Trojan horses, spyware, keyloggers, spam, and phishing schemes • Common example • Spam email, instant messages or legitimate websites to distribute links • DDoS combined with phishing emails Impact Reduction • Communicate the Issue • Be sincere and accountable • Provide details • Understand the cause of the breach • Take steps to avoid another similar breach in the future • Ensure all systems are clean • Educate employees, partners, and customers